http://nyti.ms/1i5tLoN
ECONOMY | ​NYT NOW
Report Shows Resurgence of Hiring but Has
Downbeat Notes
By NELSON D. SCHWARTZ MAY 2, 2014
The American economy picked up steam in April, as employers added
288,000 jobs while the unemployment rate fell to 6.3 percent, the lowest
level since September 2008.
After a sharp slowdown in job growth in December and January, and
a modest improvement since then, economists had been forecasting a
healthy gain for April as consumer and business activity rose in tandem
with temperatures in many parts of the country.
But the good news was tempered by a drop of 806,000 in the number
of Americans in the labor force, pushing the labor participation rate down
sharply. And despite the fall in joblessness, average hourly earnings were
flat.
“The payroll numbers suggest that the economy is recovering from a
weather-induced showdown, said Ethan Harris, co-head of global
economics at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. But “even with the drop in
the unemployment rate,” he said, “we still have not reached to point where
workers have negotiating power.”
That contradiction — more employers finally beginning to hire
workers at a more aggressive clip, but little or no improvement in weekly
paychecks for the 146 million Americans who already have jobs — presents
a challenge both for politicians and for policy makers at the Federal
Reserve.The Fed has been gradually stepping back from its stimulus efforts
this year, a stand validated somewhat by the fall in the unemployment
rate, but the lack of wage growth undermines claims by both the Fed and
some elected officials that a resurgent economy is at hand.
Nor is Washington alone in trying to figure out this complicated
picture. On Wall Street, where signs of a turnaround in hiring might be
expected to set off a rally, reaction was muted in midday trading Friday.
After initially jumping after the Labor Department report, major indexes
were almost unchanged for the day.
To be sure, month-to-month swings in hiring are a snapshot of the
economy, rather than a portrait, and frequently blur.
For example, government statisticians on Friday revised upward the
number of jobs added in February and March by a total of 36,000,
suggesting the economy was stronger than first assumed. And the April
data could be significantly revised upward — or downward — next month.
Still, the 288,000 figure for April was the best monthly increase since
January 2012. And if those kinds of labor market gains continue for the
balance of 2014, it would be a much-needed element of good news for
President Obama and Democrats on Capitol Hill, who have been
apprehensive ahead of midterm elections in November.
At a Rose Garden news conference Friday morning, Mr. Obama hailed
the good economic news, crediting the “grit and determination of the
American people” for moving the country forward economically.
But he also warned that the good news could be fleeting without a
“relentless” pursuit of policies that will create more jobs and opportunities.
He urged Congress to increase the minimum wage — a move that Senate
Republicans blocked this week with a filibuster — and to invest in
infrastructure.
“There’s plenty more that Congress should be doing,” Mr. Obama
said.
Many private-sector economists said they were pleasantly surprised by
the size of the payroll gain last month. “It’s as good as I could haveexpected,” said Ian Shepherdson, the chief economist at Pantheon
Macroeconomics. “It was either a post-winter catch-up, or the start of a
stronger trend. There’s no way to know yet, but I’m happy either way.”
More telling than any one month’s change is the average monthly gain
in payrolls over the last year, which now stands at 197,000. So April’s data
show a significant improvement over the longer-term average.
The consensus among economists polled by Bloomberg before the
Labor Department’s announcement Friday morning called for an increase
of 218,000 in nonfarm payrolls, with the unemployment rate falling by a
tenth of a percentage point, to 6.6 percent.
The monthly Labor Department report is based on two separate
surveys, one of households, the other of establishments, including
government agencies, and private-sector businesses like factories, offices
and retail stores.
The establishment survey provides the monthly estimate for payroll
changes, and is favored by economists and professional investors, while
the unemployment rate is derived from the more volatile survey of
households. Although the two measures tend to correspond over time,
month-to-month variations can be wide.
For example, the April survey of about 60,000 households indicated
that 73,000 Americans lost work last month, versus the gain of 288,000 in
the establishment survey.
While the contrast between a seeming surge in hiring by employers
and a sharp drop in the size of the work force set off a fierce debate Friday
about just what to read into the Labor Department data, Mr. Shepherdson
insisted the payrolls number was the most credible.
“The household survey is insanely volatile,” he said, noting that in past
months, the labor participation rate had been growing, with sizable gains
in the work force. “It leads people down the garden path regularly.”
As for wages remaining flat despite a healthier labor market, “this is
very definitely a puzzle,” Mr. Shepherdson said. “You would expect to see
some evidence of a shift as the unemployment rate goes down.”At 6.3 percent, the unemployment rate is down sharply from the peak
of 10 percent in October 2009, in the aftermath of the recession. But it is
still above the historical average for this stage of an economic recovery,
and masks pockets of significant joblessness among blacks, teenagers and
workers with a high school degree or less.
Strong sectors of growth last month included construction, which
gained 32,000 jobs and retail, which added 35,000 jobs. Professional and
business services, an area of the economy that is closely watched as a
barometer for broader white-collar activity, added 75,000 positions.
The health care sector, which showed strength in an otherwise
disappointing report on first-quarter economic conditions from the
Commerce Department on Wednesday, added nearly 28,000 jobs in April.
Since the start of 2014, the sector has added roughly 83,000 jobs, and
many economists expect hospitals and medical offices to keep hiring amid
increased demand from new patients with the rollout of the Affordable
Care Act.
Of the 288,000 increase in payrolls, 273,000 came in the private
sector, with government adding 15,000 positions.
On Wednesday, Federal Reserve officials said that they were seeing an
increase in economic activity, and would continue to gradually reduce
monthly bond purchases aimed at stimulating the economy.
The better-than-expected jobs report Friday comes in the wake of
other encouraging economic yardsticks. For example, a survey of hiring
among private employers in April, released by ADP on Wednesday, showed
the best monthly increase since November. In addition, the latest report on
the Institute for Supply Management’s index of factory activity,
announced Thursday, also showed an increase in output.
© 2014 The New York Times Company